1 
Accessible Components for the Built Environment: 
Technical Guidelines embracing Universal Design 
 
Background 
Accessibility1 to sites, facilities and buildings is one of the most important prerequisites for the inclusion of 
both children and adults with disabilities. To a great extent, it determines the opportunity that all children, 
particularly those with disabilities need to be able to fulfil their right to education, health and community 
participation. It is also an area where tangible progress and results can be demonstrated. 
While a fundamental precursor for inclusion, it is critical that UNICEF programmes go beyond physical 
accessibility to ensure the inclusion of children with disabilities through provision of assistive devices, 
addressing attitudinal barriers and strengthening disability inclusion in both policy and practice. Likewise, 
UNICEF will progressively adopt and promote accessibility and universal design2 in all UNICEF premises. 
In 2014, UNICEF’s Supply Division launched a global survey on accessible construction to understand the extent 
to which UNICEF country offices (COs) were including accessible components in UNICEF premises (new 
construction or rehabilitation) and in facilities delivered under programmatic or emergency settings. The result 
highlighted that 59 per cent of offices included some of these design elements in their construction projects. 
However, all COs highlighted the need for technical support from HQ in relation to the specific components 
needed to construct accessible facilities. 
 
In an effort to support COs address these challenges, and to also promote the systematic inclusion of accessible 
components in all facilities, the following technical cards have been designed. They should be used for planning 
universal design constructions along with the following documents:  
1.  International Standards for Accessible Construction (ISO 21542:2011) (electronic copies can be requested 
from Supply Division) 
2. A booklet on accessibility related to inclusive education – “Access to School and the Learning Environment 1 
(Physical, Information and Communication)” was published in 2015. In addition several tools on accessibility 
will be published by the Programme Division, Disability Section, in 2016. They include: 
 
Detailed construction guidelines and specifications on accessible school construction  
 
A toolkit on accessibility of the built environment, including considerations for accessibility of 
programme related construction and premises 
3. Designs should also adhere to the accessibility standards defined in the existing national legislation and 
standards according to the country context. 
A key consideration is that the cost for making facilities fully inclusive is marginal when the relevant accessible 
components have been carefully planned and included at the design stage. Furthermore, the social value and 
economic gain of including these features is significant when considering the impact that improved accessible 
facilities will make in providing access to a wider population in the society over the long-term.  
 
To enhance accessibility of UNICEF offices and to ensure office occupants and visitors with disabilities have the 
required mobility, safety and comfort the Greening and Accessibility Fund (GrAF) was set up by UNICEF in 2015. 
The GrAF aims to assist UNICEF offices with financing Accessibility Improvement (AI) and Environmental Impact 
Reduction (EIR) projects in UNICEF premises.  
 
To enable persons with disabilities to access and use a facility with safety, comfort  and dignity, in addition to 
the built environment being physically accessible, it is also important that relevant personnel are sensitive and 
                                                          
1 Accessibility is defined as a provision of buildings or parts of buildings for people, regardless of disability, age or gender, 
to be able to approach, enter, use, egress from and evacuate a building independently, in an equitable and dignified 
manner and to the greatest extent possible. 
2 The UNCRPD defines universal design as, “The design of products and environments to be usable by all people, to the 
greatest extent possible, without the need for adaptation or specialized design”. (Ron Mace, Center for Universal Design, 
http://www.ncsu.edu/ncsu/design/cud/about_ud/about_ud.htm) 
