Adaptations 
without delay

A guide to planning and 
delivering home adaptations differently

Royal College of Occupational Therapists

Volkswagen TS-Regular

Corbel Italic

Housing LIN

Connecting people, ideas and resources

Other titles of interest:

Care homes and equipment: guiding principles for assessment 
and provision (2019)

Occupational therapy and complexity: defining and describing 
practice (2018)

For further details, more publications and free downloads
please visit  

www.rcot.co.uk/publications

About the publisher

The  Royal  College  of  Occupational  Therapists  is  a  wholly  owned 
subsidiary  of  the  British  Association  of  Occupational  Therapists 
(BAOT)  and  operates  as  a  registered  charity.  It  represents  the 
profession  nationally  and  internationally,  and  contributes  widely 
to  policy  consultations  throughout  the  UK.  RCOT  sets  the 
professional  and  educational  standards  for  occupational  therapy, 
providing leadership, guidance and information relating to research 
and  development,  education,  practice 
and 
In  addition, 
learning. 
10 accredited specialist sections support 
expert clinical practice.

lifelong 

rcot.co.uk

1/19

Adaptations without delay
A guide to planning and delivering
home adaptations differently

Endorsed by

Volkswagen TS-Regular

Corbel Italic

Housing LIN

Connecting people, ideas and resources

First published in 2019
by the Royal College of Occupational Therapists
106–114 Borough High Street
London SE1 1LB
www.rcot.co.uk

Copyright © Royal College of Occupational Therapists 2019

Author: Royal College of Occupational Therapists
Writers: Rachel Russell, Marney Walker, Ian Copeman, Jeremy Porteus

All rights reserved, including translation. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system or transmitted, by any form or any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning or otherwise without the prior permission
in writing of the Royal College of Occupational Therapists, unless otherwise agreed or
indicated. Copying is not permitted except for personal and internal use, to the extent
permitted by national copyright law, or under the terms of a licence issued by the relevant
national reproduction rights organisation (such as the Copyright Licensing Agency in the
UK). Requests for permission for other kinds of copying, such as copying for general
distribution, for advertising or promotional purposes, for creating new collective works, 
or for resale, should be addressed to the Publications Manager at the above address.

Other enquiries about this document should be addressed to Secretariat, Royal College 
of Occupational Therapists at the above address. 

British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library. 

While every effort is made to ensure accuracy, the Royal College of Occupational Therapists
shall not be liable for any loss or damage either directly or indirectly resulting from the use
of this publication.

ISBN 978-1-905944-88-0

Typeset by Fish Books Ltd
Digitally printed on demand in Great Britain by The Lavenham Press, Suffolk

Contents

Executive summary...................................................................................................................iv

1.

 Introduction .........................................................................................................................1
    Purpose of this guide ...........................................................................................................2
    Intended audience................................................................................................................3
    The role of this guide for different audiences...................................................................3

2.

 Why Adaptations without delay? ......................................................................................5
    What the review found .........................................................................................................5
    What constrains providing adaptations without delay?...................................................6

3.

 Adaptations without delay: a framework for decision making .................................8
    The Adaptations without delay framework: overview ......................................................10
    The purpose of the framework .........................................................................................10
    Using the framework to support decisions about the level of 
    intervention required .........................................................................................................11

4. How to use the Adaptations without delay framework in practice to

    improve delivery of adaptations ..................................................................................16
    Introduction.........................................................................................................................16
    How to use the framework to provide a proportionate response................................16
    How to use the framework to establish a workforce with the 
    appropriate skills mix .........................................................................................................19
    How to use the framework if you are a builder, retailer or product 
    manufacturer ......................................................................................................................23
    How to use the framework if you are a member of the public.....................................24

Annexe 1. Sources of design guidance.................................................................................27
    Adaptations .........................................................................................................................27
    Inclusive and accessible housing ......................................................................................29
    Cognitive impairments.......................................................................................................31
    Visual Impairment ..............................................................................................................32

Annexe 2. Review method and findings ..............................................................................34

About the authors....................................................................................................................38
Steering group members ........................................................................................................40

Royal College of Occupational Therapists

iii

Executive summary

Introduction

The benefits of adapting the home are recognised as an effective way to improve 
the health and wellbeing of older people, and disabled adults and children. A more
accessible home environment can improve independence, reduce risk and reduce
reliance on assistance. As the body of evidence demonstrating the benefits of home
adaptations grows, so does the recognition that the sooner they are installed, the
greater will be the preventative benefits. 

Across the UK there continue to be delays in the delivery of minor and major
adaptations across all housing tenures. In recognition of this continuing issue, in 2017
the Royal College of Occupational Therapy (RCOT) commissioned the Housing Learning
and Improvement Network (Housing LIN) to conduct a UK-wide review of Minor
adaptations without delay (2006), which was focused on enabling housing associations to
provide minor adaptations without the need for an occupational therapy assessment,
and to identify whether a new version was required. 

Review of current practice

The Housing LIN review was extensive. It involved a review of UK-wide policy and
legislation related to the assessment and delivery of adaptations; stakeholder
consultation across England, Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales that involved
telephone interviews with managers of occupational therapy services, housing
providers, housing associations, home improvement agencies, and care and repair
services; a nationwide survey completed by 800 front-line practitioners; and focus
groups involving key personnel and organisations from the four UK nations.

The key findings of the review were as follows:
• A common theme in legislation and policy across the UK is the need for a more
preventative approach to interventions, including adaptations, for older people,
disabled children and adults, to maximise health and wellbeing.

• Waiting for a social care assessment is cited as a key factor in contributing to delays in
the delivery of adaptations. Legislation pertaining to the funding of major adaptations
has been misinterpreted as being dependent on an occupational therapy assessment.
• Current systems for delivering adaptations need to provide person-centred outcomes
through a more integrated and collaborative approach to the assessment, design and
installation of adaptations.

• In terms of demand for major adaptations, the most common are showers, stairlifts

and ramps, often in situations that are simple and straightforward.

• Typically, the need for an adaptation has been defined by the type or cost of the

solution, rather than the complexity of the situation.

iv

Adaptations without delay

Executive summary

• It is recognised that there is a large proportion of people who are not eligible for
funding for adaptations who could benefit from better information, advice and
guidance on how to get adaptations installed. 

Adaptations without delay: a guide

From the review findings it was clear that a radically different approach to addressing the
delays in the assessment and delivery of adaptations was required. This new approach
sets out a better way of defining adaptations based on complexity. It focuses on the role
of adaptations as a preventative intervention to support person-centred outcomes using
an approach that makes the best use of the skills mix within the workforce. 

The Adaptations without delay guide provides a fresh new approach. It has been developed
in conjunction with those consulted during the review process and the RCOT’s steering
group. The overall aim of the guide is to reduce delays in the delivery of adaptations by
providing tools that support a proportionate response. The guidance also ensures the
valued and specialist skills of occupational therapists can be used to work with the
growing number of individuals whose circumstances are complex.

The guide sets out the Adaptations without delay decision-making framework. The
framework outlines the person-centred outcomes that can be achieved from having 
the home adapted. Workforce and operational factors to support integrated and new
ways of working are identified. The framework outlines the different levels of complexity
of the situation, rather than cost and type of adaptation. The levels of complexity are
defined as:
• Universal (simple, low level).
• Targeted (straightforward, moderate).
• Specialist (complex, high risk).

The guide outlines circumstances when occupational therapists need to work closely
with those with the technical expertise necessary to establish and develop bespoke
adaptations and ensure that the installation is feasible. The guide highlights ways that
occupational therapists can add value at a strategic level in the design of services,
communication tools, and the provision of training and support for unregulated staff. 

Practice examples from across the UK include:
• Training and support to enable support workers, trusted assessors and occupational
therapy assistants to assess and make recommendations for major adaptations
where the situation is simple and straightforward. 

• Triage and duty systems at first point of contact used to identify whether or not the
input of an occupational therapist is required to support a more proportionate and
timely response.

• Integrated services that have established the right skills mix in the workforce in order

to provide a proportionate response to reduce delays in the installation of
adaptations.

Royal College of Occupational Therapists

v

Executive summary

• Services that recognise the value of occupational therapists’ skills by focusing on

complex cases.

The guide provides a list of what are considered to be the best examples of technical
and design guidance to achieve the most accessible adaptations, as well as design to
address the needs of people with sensory and cognitive impairments.

The guide is intended to have the following benefits:
• Ensuring a more responsive service to those needing adaptations.
• Reducing demand on occupational therapy services.
• Providing reasoning for key stakeholders about adaptations that do not need an

assessment by an occupational therapist.

• Recognising the expertise of occupational therapists in complex situations where

adaptations are required.

• Being applicable in all four UK nations.

Intended audience

The guide and the framework are intended to be used at a practitioner and strategic
level by personnel in occupational therapy services, home improvement agencies, care
and repair agencies, housing associations and other housing providers, but also by
members of the public who need to know when to seek advice from an occupational
therapist. It may also be of interest to health and social care commissioners and care
practitioners where there is a need for an adaptation to help facilitate someone’s care
and support at home or reablement.

vi

Adaptations without delay

1  Introduction

There is widespread recognition that some simple changes to the home environment
can completely transform the lives of older people, disabled people and children by
enabling them to function more easily and safely in their own homes. 

The Equalities and Human Rights Commission found that approximately 1.8 million
disabled people require suitable housing and approximately 300,000 do not have
the adaptations they need in their existing homes.1

A growing body of evidence supports the view that home adaptations can prevent falls,
reduce hospital admissions, reduce reliance on care, avoid the need to move into
residential care and significantly improve quality of life and wellbeing for individuals,
their families and carers.2 At the same time, the retail market and independent builders
are beginning to adapt to consumer-led changes. There is potential for a growing
self-funder market across all tenures for equipment and adaptations.

A number of factors (including demographic changes) are therefore increasing
demand for home adaptations. Yet across the UK there continue to be significant
delays in the delivery of adaptations.3 The UK Government’s recent review of Disabled
Facilities Grants (DFGs)4 in England highlights that there is a pressing need for all
services concerned to be able to provide a more timely response to installing
adaptations that can deliver better outcomes for the person. In Wales, the Auditor
General found that public bodies have a limited understanding of the longer-term
benefits of housing adaptations, and there remains significant scope to reform the
system to improve equality and wellbeing.5

1

2

3

Equality and Human Rights Commission (2018) Housing and disabled people: Britain’s hidden crisis. [s. l.]:
Equality and Human Rights Commission. Available at:
https://www.equalityhumanrights.com/sites/default/files/housing-and-disabled-people-britains-hidden-crisis-
main-report_0.pdf Accessed on 16.11.18.
Centre for Ageing Better (2017) Room to improve: the role of home adaptations in improving later life.
[London]: Centre for Ageing Better. Available at:
https://www.ageing-better.org.uk/publications/room-improve-role-home-adaptations-improving-later-life
Accessed on 09.11.19.
Equality and Human Rights Commission (2018) Housing and disabled people: Britain’s hidden crisis. [s. l.]:
Equality and Human Rights Commission. Available at:
https://www.equalityhumanrights.com/sites/default/files/housing-and-disabled-people-britains-hidden-crisis-
main-report_0.pdf Accessed on 16.11.18.

4 Mackintosh S, Smith P, Garrett H, Davidson M, Morgan G, Russell R (2018) Disabled Facilities Grant (DFG)
and other adaptations reviews: external review. Main report. Bristol: University of the West of England.
Available at:
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/762920/In
dependent_Review_of_the_Disabled_Facilities_Grant.pdf Accessed on 12.03.19. 
Auditor General for Wales (2018) Housing adaptations. Cardiff: Wales Audit Office. Available at:
http://www.audit.wales/system/files/publications/housing-adaptations-2018-english.pdf Accessed on
12.03.19.

5

Royal College of Occupational Therapists

1

Introduction

Whether based in housing, health or social care, occupational therapists have an
established role in carrying out assessments and making recommendations for
adaptations, partly driven by statutory obligations. Their specialist expertise is invaluable
in contributing to finding the best solutions to support older and disabled people in
their own homes. However, there is a significant proportion of situations that are simple
and straightforward which may not require specialist occupational therapy assessment
or interventions. This is particularly the case where the timely installation of an
adaptation or a piece of equipment prevents or delays the development of more acute
health and social care needs. 

Purpose of this guide

HOW TO USE THIS GUIDE

This guide will enable you:
• To reduce delays by avoiding service design and delivery based on cost and

type of adaptation.

• To make more effective use of occupational therapists by understanding the
workforce skills and operational considerations required to deliver adaptations.
• To reduce delays where legislation and the role of occupational therapists has

been misinterpreted.

• To understand the type of situations where an occupational therapist does

not need to be involved in the assessment for an adaptation.

• To develop or redesign service delivery models based on person-centred and

preventative outcomes.

• To understand what level of home adaptation service and help you might

offer.

• To ensure your organisation takes a safe and person-centred approach to

providing adaptations to older and disabled people.

The primary purpose of this guide is to address delays in the delivery of all types of
adaptations (minor and major) across all tenures that occur when people receive a
disproportionate response to their need for an adaptation. Delays in installing adaptations
can increase the risk of health and social care needs developing or increasing. A person
waiting for an occupational therapy assessment where the situation and need for an
adaptation is relatively simple and straightforward should therefore be avoided. 

The core principles underlying this guide are that the person is central to the process
and that the preventative benefits of adaptations are maximised. The aim is to enable all
services concerned with adaptations to provide a more proportionate and timely
response, reducing delays in installation of adaptations and alleviating the likelihood of
an unplanned hospital admission or an unwanted move to residential or nursing care.
The intention is that the widespread skills and knowledge of all professionals involved in the
adaptation process are put to best effect.

2

Adaptations without delay

Introduction

Intended audience 

Adaptations without delay is intended to be used by practitioners and organisations
across the UK who may be contacted by disabled and older people and their families
who are seeking advice or support with home adaptations, including:
• Occupational therapists in health, social care and housing settings.
• Occupational therapists in independent practice.
• Housing association housing managers and officers, surveyors and property staff.
• Local authority housing managers and officers, surveyors and property staff.
• Care and repair agency technical staff and case workers.
• Handyperson services staff.
• Home improvement agency technical staff and case worker (England).
• Health and social care commissioners and practitioners in local authorities and 

the NHS.

• Members of Integrated Joint Boards (Scotland).
• Members of Regional Partnership Boards (Wales).
• Members of Health and Wellbeing Boards (England).
• Environmental health officers/grants officers.
• Voluntary organisations’ housing staff/home visitors.
• Organisations delivering training on the assessment and delivery of adaptations.
• Individuals and their families who need to know about how to get adaptations

installed.

The role of this guide for different audiences

Housing providers

Adaptations without delay builds on the previous publication Minor adaptations without
delay (2006), which provided a rationale to support housing associations to provide
minor adaptations without an occupational therapy assessment. Rather than providing a
fixed range of minor adaptations, this guide will help housing providers consider how to
provide a wider range of adaptations to their tenants without the direct involvement of
an occupational therapist.

Local authority housing services, home improvement agencies and care
and repair agencies

It provides a framework for considering the most appropriate response to a person’s
need for an adaptation. Based on the complexity of the situation, the framework will
help those currently delivering adaptations to address the skills mix and operational
considerations needed to deliver a wider range of adaptations without the direct
involvement of an occupational therapist. 

Royal College of Occupational Therapists

3

Introduction

Occupational therapists

It provides tools to help occupational therapists articulate the value of their role in the
adaptation process. By highlighting how their specialist skills and knowledge contribute
to the adaptation process, the guide and framework helps to identify the circumstances
when occupational therapists can be most effective in individual cases, at an operational
level and in the strategic planning of services.

Health and social care commissioners and practitioners with 
responsibility for improving the delivery of adaptations

It highlights that delays in providing adaptations are often a result of the fragmented
approach to the assessment, funding and installation of adaptations. Better integration
of housing, health and social care provides an opportunity to consider how adaptations
can be delivered without delay. It also sets out an overview of the Adaptations without
delay framework (Section 3), providing those with strategic responsibility for integration
or commissioning with an understanding of how the care and support of individuals
with different needs can be addressed through different types of adaptation
interventions to achieve improved person-centred outcomes.

Retailers, product suppliers and independent builders

Older and disabled people are becoming less reliant on, or are being signposted 
away from, statutory services. To adapt their home, many older and disabled people 
are directly purchasing products or employing builders. It is therefore vital that this
sector provides safe and person-centred services. The framework can help guide
retailers, product suppliers and independent contractors to understand when they 
need to consult with an occupational therapist for support to design and install the 
right solution.

Members of the public

While the guidance in this publication is focused towards those assessing and 
delivering adaptations, members of the public will also find the publication useful. 
A better understanding of how adaptations can help, and what kind of service they 
need to address the type of problem they might have, will help them to get an
adaptation installed without delays.

4

Adaptations without delay

2  Why Adaptations without delay?

DID YOU KNOW?

Preventing or reducing delays in people receiving adaptations can:
• Help people stay well at home for longer.
• Give people choice and control over their health and wellbeing.
• Help people have access to the wider community.
• Prevent or reduce the risk of falls.
• Reduce the need for formal care, informal care and residential care.
• Avoid unnecessary hospital admission.

In 2018, the Royal College of Occupational Therapy (RCOT) commissioned the Housing
Learning and Improvement Network (Housing LIN) to conduct a review of the Minor
adaptations without delay (2006) publication. This publication provided guidance to
support housing associations to provide minor adaptations without the need to refer for
an occupational therapy assessment. The review considered whether the guide needed
to be updated, and if so, how it could be made applicable to stakeholders across the UK.
The review method and findings are summarised in Annexe 2.

What the review found

The Housing LIN review found consistent policy themes and approaches across all four
UK nations that are relevant to the provision of adaptations:
• Health and social care policy across all four nations supports a ‘person-centred’ or

‘citizen-centred’ approach. With regard to minor adaptations, this appears to support
the policy of self-assessment and identification of own needs.

• Minor adaptations have a central role in the prevention ‘agenda’, including the
reduction of falls, delaying admission to hospital, supporting re-ablement and
recovery at home by enabling discharge from hospital or preventing a readmission. 

• The process for delivering minor adaptations is done through a combination of

integrated community equipment services, home improvement agencies/care and
repair agencies, and by housing associations, with health, social care, housing
professionals or older people referring into these services. However, in England,
Scotland and Wales local authorities appear to take different approaches to how
services for minor adaptations are accessed and provided.

• There is potential for better use of resources through a recognition that occupational
therapists do not need to assess for adaptations that are required to resolve ‘simple
issues’. However, there appears to be relatively little guidance on defining the
difference between simple issues and complex situations that need the expertise of
an occupational therapist.

Royal College of Occupational Therapists

5

Why Adaptations without delay?

Across the UK, at both a strategic and practitioner level, the review found that:
• The greatest demand is for adaptations such as showers, stairlifts and ramps, which
are often classed as major adaptations but can often be simple and straightforward.
• There continue to be delays for people who can self-direct their own care and wish to

adapt their homes but are having to wait for a social care assessment from the
occupational therapy service.

• There is a concern that delay in providing adaptations is potentially reducing the

benefits of adaptations as a preventative intervention, for example impacting on their
recovery or rehabilitation.

• With appropriate training and supervision, support workers, occupational therapy
assistants and trusted assessors in many areas are carrying out assessments for
shower adaptations, community equipment, assistive technology, stairlifts and ramps
where the situation is simple and straightforward.

• In some areas the skills, knowledge and experience of occupational therapists are

being used at a strategic level to develop policies, design guidance, triaging tools and
training to ensure the right level of assessment and skills mix is used to make best
use of local housing stock for existing/prospective residents, deliver tailored
adaptations, improve the quality of the home environment and reduce delays.

What constrains providing adaptations without delay?

DID YOU KNOW?

The review found that barriers to delivering adaptations included:

1. Misinterpretation of legislation pertaining to the funding of adaptations.

2. A lack of research and evidence-based best practice guidance on the role of

occupational therapists in the home adaptation process.

3.

The assumption that if an adaptation is ‘major’ it is complex and must involve
an occupational therapist.

At the strategic, operational and practitioner levels the review found that stakeholders
want to address the delays in delivering adaptations, but they also identified barriers to
change. The three main barriers were:

1. A misinterpretation of legislation (pertaining to eligibility for the funding of

adaptations) has led to the assumption that a request for a major adaptation
should be accompanied by an assessment and recommendation from an
occupational therapist.

2. A lack of published guidance is preventing teams wanting to provide a wider range

of adaptations, without the direct involvement of an occupational therapist, from
developing the policies and procedures that would help with the risk management
of this change.

6

Adaptations without delay

Why Adaptations without delay?

3. Allowing the cost and type of adaptation to define the complexity of a case is

preventing occupational therapists from concentrating their specialist skills on
working with individuals whose circumstances are most complex and where they
would have the greatest impact on the individual’s health and wellbeing.

To reduce delays caused by the barriers identified by stakeholders, it was evident that a
new type of guide was required in place of Minor adaptations without delay. Moving away
from a prescribed list of adaptations and technical guidance, this guide introduces a
framework to support the delivery of adaptations without delay.

This framework defines adaptations based on both the complexity of the situation and
the type of structural alteration to the home. Based on person-centred outcomes, the
framework identifies different levels of intervention, and what health and social care
needs can be met by having the home adapted. There is also guidance on workforce 
and operational considerations required for the different levels of intervention.

Royal College of Occupational Therapists

7

3  Adaptations without delay: 

a framework for decision making

GETTING STARTED: What you need to know

• The framework describes three levels of home adaptations interventions:

universal, targeted, specialist.

• There is a description of the person-centred outcomes expected at each level of

intervention.

• The level (or type) of intervention is based on the person’s care and support

needs and the potential type of solution required.

• The framework includes three tables describing the nature of complexity at each
level of intervention and identifies the workforce and operational requirements
to deliver that level of intervention.

The design of the framework has been influenced by the widely recognised and
influential Balanced System® of improving integrated care services for children6 and the
Comprehensive Model for Personalised Care.7 Both these models link person-centred
outcomes with the level of intervention that best addresses the health and care needs 
of the person. Using this approach ensures people receive a proportionate level of
assessment and response to their needs while reducing unnecessary delays as well 
as demand for specialist practitioners and services.

To overcome the barrier that occupational therapists need to be involved in the
assessment of all major adaptation because major adaptations have typically been
defined as complex, the Adaptations without delay framework adopts a definition of
adaptations8 that considers the types of solutions alongside the complexity of the
situation in four key areas:

1.

2.

3.

4.

6
7

8

8

The person, their priorities and needs.

The nature of the activities the person is having difficulty performing.

The environmental barriers to independence (physical, social etc.).

The types of solutions required.

See https://www.thebalancedsystem.org.
[NHS England] [2018] Comprehensive personalised care model. [London]: [NHS England.] Available at:
https://www.england.nhs.uk/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/comprehensive-model-of-personalised-care.pdf
Accessed on 12.03.19.
Ainsworth E, de Jonge D (2018) Minor modifications: it’s not as simple as ‘do it yourself’ (DIY). In: E
Ainsworth, D de Jonge, eds. An occupational therapist’s guide to home modification practice. 2nd ed.
Thorofare, NJ: Slack. 381–388.

Adaptations without delay

A framework for decision making

This approach to defining adaptations recognises that a simple grab rail may be the
solution to a complex situation. Conversely, a shower adaptation can be a solution to 
a simple problem. In the first scenario, the person benefits from the assessment skills
of the occupational therapist who will consider a range of other factors that may
impact on the safety and wellbeing of the individual and their situation. In the second
scenario, the person benefits from the design and installation skills of a technical
officer and builder. 

The four types of adaptations are described in Table 1. 

Table 1 Categories of adaptations (adapted from the framework for home modification
service delivery9)

Type of adaptation                          Description 

1.   Simple situation requiring a       Installation of this type of adaptation requires 
     simple adaptation or readily      minimal disruption to the structure or fabric of 
     available off-the-shelf/retail       the home and/or is a readily available off-the-
     solution.                                         shelf/retail solution.

2.   Simple situation requiring          Installation of this type of adaptation impacts on 
     a standard structural                   one or two aspects of the home environment, 
     solution.                                         involving structural changes but with minimal

disruption. The adaptations may involve
reconfiguration of the space, but this can be
achieved through standard building alterations 
or installation techniques.

3.   Complex situation requiring       A person has one or more complex key area 
     a non-structural solution.           of need (see above) which requires the

non-structural solution to be customised for 
the person. 

4.   Complex situation requiring       A person has one or more complex key area 
     a specialised structural                of need (see above) requiring a specialised 
     solution.                                         structural solution. This type of adaptation

requires substantial structural changes to the
home environment. The solution will involve
reconfiguration of the spatial layout and/or
installation of specialist fixtures and fittings, 
such as height-adjustable baths.

9

Ainsworth E, de Jonge D (2018) Minor modifications: it’s not as simple as ‘do it yourself’ (DIY). In: E
Ainsworth, D de Jonge, eds. An occupational therapist’s guide to home modification practice. 2nd ed.
Thorofare, NJ: Slack. 381–388.

Royal College of Occupational Therapists

9

A framework for decision making

The Adaptations without delay framework: overview

Figure 1 provides an overview of the framework, illustrating the link between the
complexity of the health and care need and the type of intervention that best addresses
the person-centred outcome. The levels of intervention are divided into universal,
targeted and specialist types of solution. A person’s health and care needs are not fixed
and will change over time; for this reason, it is important that this is considered each
time a person approaches a service for support. 

TYPE OF 
INTERVENTION

CARE AND 
SUPPORT NEEDS

OUTCOMES

Specialist 
The person’s situation 
is complex and the 
solution is a 
personalised 
non-structural or 
specialist structural 
adaptation.

Targeted
The person’s situation 
is simple and
straightforward but
support is required 
to identify a solution. 
The solution is a 
standard structural or a
non-structural adaptation.

Universal
The person’s situation 
and the solution is 
simple and they can 
be signposted to retail 
options and/or 
supported to install 
simple adaptations.

Older
and 
disabled 
adults and 
children with 
complex needs

Empowering people 
to reduce unplanned
health and social 
care needs through 
the timely provision 
of home adaptations.

Older and disabled 
adults with long-term 
health conditions

Supporting people 
to live well through 
the timely provision 
of home adaptations.

Whole population – with general needs

Enabling people to 
make informed 
decisions about how 
to stay well through 
the timely provision 
of home adaptations.

Figure 1 The Adaptations without delay framework

The purpose of the framework

The framework provides a holistic guide to the assessment and delivery of adaptations
that supports positive risk taking for those who wish to explore different ways of
working. It avoids disproportionate use of specialist occupational therapy services and
offers a definition of adaptations that focuses on the outcomes for the person, rather
than the funding mechanisms for the type of solution that is being installed.  

10

Adaptations without delay

A framework for decision making

The framework takes a person-centred approach that ensures the level of intervention is
proportionate to the person’s housing, health and social care needs. The framework: 
• Outlines the circumstances when the needs and the solution are both simple and

straightforward, and direct input by an occupational therapist may not be required. 

• Provides a better understanding of the role of occupational therapists in the

assessment, recommendation and design of adaptations, based on the complexity of
the situation, rather than the type or cost of the adaptation.

• Outlines the appropriate level of workforce skills and governance required to meet

demand and improve the delivery of an extended range of adaptations. 

Using the framework to support decisions about the level
of intervention required

This section explains how the framework detailed in the following tables can be used to
understand the difference in complexity between universal, targeted and specialist types
of intervention, the workforce skills and the operational and governance issues that
need to be addressed at each level. 

Universal types of intervention and services enable people with low levels of needs to
make informed decisions about how to stay well through the timely provision of home
adaptations. The solution is simple and they or their carer can be signposted to retail
options and/or supported to install simple adaptations.

Rita is struggling to get on and off her toilet. She contacts the local handyperson
scheme to discuss her difficulties and arrangements are made to install a grab rail
beside the toilet.

Targeted types of intervention and services enable older or disabled people with
long-term health conditions to maintain their personal dignity, reduce risks and live well
in their own homes through the timely provision of adaptations. The person’s situation is
simple and straightforward, but support is required to identify the most appropriate
solution. The solution could be universal, but is likely to be a non-structural adaptation
or standard structural solution.

Robert was provided with bathing equipment several years ago, but he is
struggling to use the equipment. He is visited at home by a member of a Home
Improvement Agency. Through a discussion with Robert and an assessment of his
difficulties, it is identified that the installation of a wet room will help him to remain
independent with his personal care routine. 

Royal College of Occupational Therapists

11

A framework for decision making

Specialist types of interventions and services empower people with complex health and
social care needs to maintain their personal dignity, and reduce unplanned health and
social service care needs through the timely provision of home adaptations. Due to the
complexity of the situation it is likely the solution will be a personalised non-structural or
specialist structural adaptation. 

Helen has multiple sclerosis and is finding a range of activities of daily living
difficult to perform. Her abilities change from day to day. She wants advice on
how to make changes to her home so that she can maintain her personal dignity,
wellbeing and independence. An occupational therapist visits Helen at home. The
occupational therapist works with Helen in the home environment and identifies
the barriers in the home impacting on Helen. As part of understanding what type
of adaptations Helen will require, the occupational therapist arranges for her to
visit a demonstration centre. At the demonstration centre Helen is able to try
different products and to look at options for adapting her home. Using the
information from the assessment and visit to the demonstration centre, the
occupational therapist visits Helen at home with a technical officer from the local
authority housing team, who suggests several potential solutions. The
occupational therapist works together with Helen to agree on the best long-term
solution, and with this information an application for funding is made. 

The following tables for each level of intervention provide detailed information about
factors contributing to complexity at that level. Each table sets out the staff skills and
operational factors that need to be considered to provide each level of intervention to
achieve the best personal outcomes.

KEY LEARNING: Benefits of using the Adaptations without 
delay framework

The framework provides a structure for considering how current practice 
or future service design can be improved to deliver adaptations without 
delay by:
• Providing a more proportionate response based on level of need and the

complexity of the person’s situation and type of solution required.

• Establishing a workforce with the appropriate skills mix.
• Acting as a guide to retailers and product manufacturers as to when members
of the public may require a more targeted or specialist level of intervention.
• Helping members of the public understand the level of intervention or type of

service they need to adapt their home.

12

Adaptations without delay

Table 2 Adaptations without delay: UNIVERSAL level of intervention

NATURE OF COMPlExITY

WORkFORCE SkIllS

OPERATIONAl CONSIDERATIONS

Health condition is:
• Predictable.
• Stable.
• No recent deterioration in health or

wellbeing.

The need is related to:
• Reducing or preventing risk.
• Enabling a person to maintain

performance of basic activities of daily
living.

• Person and/or family can communicate

and make decisions about their needs and
the solution.

Complexity of the anticipated 
adaptations
• Person and/or family can communicate

and make decisions about type of solution
required.

• The adaptation(s) being installed is an

oﬀ-the-shelf solution and does not need
specialising to meet the person’s need.
• It is anticipated the solution will be simple
and intuitive to use and will not require
any specialist training or support to use.

• Person will require no or only minimal
support to use the adaptation(s).

Staﬀ with:
• Knowledge and understanding of how
health conditions and the ageing/
developmental processes impact on the
performance of simple everyday activities.
• Knowledge and understanding of how to
arrange the installation of a range of
oﬀ-the-shelf adaptations that reduce /
prevent risk or enable a person to
perform basic activities of daily living.
• Ability to signpost appropriately to local

services including retail and handyperson
services that can assist with installation of
simple oﬀ-the-shelf adaptations.

• An understanding of the circumstances
when a person requires targeted or
specialist input, including when it is
appropriate to consult an occupational
therapist.

Accessing service
• First contact triage tool to identify if it is a

targeted case.

Delivery of service
• Agreed policies, procedures and system 
for the delivery of adaptations provided
without an occupational therapy
assessment.

• Agreed criteria for when to refer to

targeted or specialist services or when to
consult with an occupational therapist.
• Agreed training and competency levels for
non-occupational therapy staﬀ who will
facilitate process.

• Agreed best practice guidance on the
installation of oﬀ-the-shelf products.
• Simple and transparent processes for
procurement and installation of
adaptations.

• Partnership agreements between social

care, health and housing agencies, housing
associations, home improvement agencies
and care and repair involved in the delivery
of adaptations.

• Eﬀective review processes following

installation of the adaptation.

Table 3 Adaptations without delay: TARGETED level of intervention

NATURE OF COMPlExITY

WORkFORCE SkIllS

OPERATIONAl CONSIDERATIONS

Health condition is:
• Predictable.
• Stable.
• No recent deterioration in health or

wellbeing.

The need is related to:
• Reducing or prevent risk.
• Enabling a person to maintain

performance of basic activities of daily
living.

• Person and/or family can communicate
and make decisions about their needs.

• A visit is required to identify solution.

Complexity of the anticipated 
adaptations
• Person and/or family can communicate
and make decisions about their needs.
• The adaptation(s) being installed is simple
and readily available, and if a structural
solution (e.g. bathroom adaptation) it does
not need specialising to meet the person’s
need.

• It is anticipated the solution will be simple
and intuitive to use and will not require
any specialist training or support to use.

• Person will require no or only minimal
support to use the adaptation(s).

Staﬀ with:
• Ability to take a person-centred approach

Accessing service
• First contact triage tool to identify if it is a

to identifying priorities, needs and
preferences.

• Knowledge and understanding of how
health conditions and the ageing/
developmental processes impact on the
performance of simple everyday activities.
• Knowledge and understanding of how to

identify hazards and barriers to
independence within the home
environment.

• Knowledge and understanding of how to
identify and recommend a range of
oﬀ-the-shelf and standard structural
adaptations (e.g. stairlifts/shower
adaptions) that reduce/prevent risk or
enable a person to perform basic activities
of daily living.

• Ability to select and use appropriate

documentation to procure adaptations
appropriate to identiﬁed needs.

• An understanding of when the complexity
of the situation requires specialist input
and when it is appropriate to consult an
occupational therapist.

targeted case.

Delivery of service
• Agreed criteria for delegation.
• Agreed policies, procedures and system for

the assessment and delivery of
adaptations provided without an
occupational therapy assessment.
• Agreed criteria for when to refer to

specialist services or when to consult with
an occupational therapist.

• Agreed training and competency levels for
non-occupational therapy staﬀ who will
conduct home visits.

• Tools to support eﬀective communication.
• Agreed design standards and installation
best practice for standard structural
adaptations.

• Agreed best practice guidance on the
installation of oﬀ-the-shelf products.
• Partnership agreements between social

care, health and housing agencies, housing
associations, home improvement agencies
and care and repair involved in the delivery
of adaptations.

• Simple and transparent processes for

procurement.

• Eﬀective review processes following

installation of the adaptation.

Table 4 Adaptations without delay: SPECIALIST level of intervention

NATURE OF COMPlExITY

WORkFORCE SkIllS

OPERATIONAl CONSIDERATIONS

Health condition is:
• Unpredictable.
• Changeable/ﬂuctuating.
• Including cognitive impairment.
• Combined with physical/sensory/

cognitive impairments.

• Associated with being neuro-divergent.

Need is related to:
• Changing needs over time (child to adult).
• Reducing or preventing risk.
• A sudden change in health, independence and/or
safety impacting on the identify and roles of the
person and/or carer.

• Safeguarding issues identiﬁed.
• Advocacy needs during the assessment process.
• Advocacy needs to make decisions about design

of adaption.

• Carers using adaptations as part of care package.

Complexity of the anticipated adaptations
• Several areas of home need adaptation.
• The adaptation will need to accommodate the

use of specialist equipment.

• Installing adaptations could impact signiﬁcantly

on other members of the household.
• Solution is non-structural or a specialised
structural solution and requires both
occupational therapy and technical involvement.

Staﬀ with:
• Ability to take a person-centred approach

Accessing service
• Eﬀective triaging tool to identify

to identifying priorities, needs and
preferences.

• Knowledge and understanding of how
health conditions and the ageing/
developmental processes impact on the
performance of simple everyday
activities.

• Knowledge and understanding of how to
identify and recommend a range of
oﬀ-the-shelf and standard structural
adaptations (e.g. stairlifts/shower
adaptions) that reduce /prevent risk or
enable a person to perform basic
activities of daily living.

• Knowledge and understanding of how to
select a range of interventions, including
reablement, activity adaptation, energy
conservation, moving and handling,
advice and support for families and
carers.

• Ability to eﬀectively communicate the

details of bespoke adaptations and liaise
with technical oﬃcers to ﬁnd the best
solutions appropriate to needs.

• Knowledge and understanding of when
an occupational therapy specialist
assessment is not needed and it is
appropriate to delegate assessment to
targeted or universal input.

complexity of situation.

• Consider access to short-term
solutions (i.e. equipment) while
longer-term solutions are considered.

Delivery of service
• Person-centred process bringing
together the assessment, design,
procurement and installation of
complex specialised structural
solutions.

• Integrated teams and/or joint working
arrangements between occupational
therapy and housing technical
expertise.

• Clear delegation of roles in relation to
the adaptation process and who
considers design requirements, writes
technical speciﬁcations, designs
technical solutions and supports
procurement of the adaptation.  
• Eﬀective and eﬃcient procurement

processes.

• Eﬀective review processes following

installation of the adaptation.

4  How to use the Adaptations 
without delay framework in
practice to improve delivery of
adaptations

Introduction

Successful delivery of home adaptations is reliant on knowledge and understanding of
what works best for the person and their situation. In practice, people need timely
advice about what they might need, how they can get it and who can help them. This
section considers how the Adaptations without delay framework can be used to achieve
the above.

In this section you will learn how to use the framework:

• To provide a proportionate response.
• To support the development of a workforce with appropriate knowledge and

skills.

• If you are builder, retailer or product manufacturer and want a guide as to when

a person may require a more targeted or specialist level of intervention.

• If you are a member of the public and want to understand the level of

intervention or type of service you need to adapt your home.

How to use the framework to provide a proportionate
response

Key message for achieving proportionate response

Getting the right response at the first point of contact, followed by signposting
people to the right type of service (universal, targeted, specialist) reduces delays
and the likelihood of people waiting on lists for assessments they do not require. 

Signposting at first point of contact: At the first point of contact identifying and
signposting people to the type of intervention/service they require reduces delays. The
nature of complexity columns in the intervention tables (Tables 2–4, Section 3) can be
used to support the development of tools to identify the type of intervention a person
requires (based on the person’s health condition, the nature of the need and the
complexity of the anticipated adaptation). 

16

Adaptations without delay

Practice to improve delivery of adaptations

Communicating the level of service delivery: Delays can be prevented when people
are directed to a service that can best meet their needs. Services (including the retail
sector) can use the overview of the framework and the four categories of adaptations
(Section 3, Table 1) to benchmark the level of intervention/service they currently provide.
This information can then be used to communicate what level of intervention a service 
is able to provide.

Supporting service development or redesign: Services can increase the range 
of adaptations they provide without an occupational therapy assessment if they
address the workforce skills/knowledge and operational issues that arise when an
occupational therapist is not directly involved in the process. The workforce skills 
and operational considerations column of each intervention table (Tables 2–4, Section
3) can act as audit questions to identify these gaps and issues, helping to support
service development or redesign. 

Strategic planning and oversight of adaptation services: A key recommendation
from reports on the delivery of adaptations is the need to improve the strategic 
planning of services that deliver adaptations. The overview of the framework can be
used to map and understand current assessment and delivery mechanisms in a 
locality. This information identifies gaps in provision, where improvement in pathways 
to access adaptations can be achieved and opportunities for integrated working or
joining up of services. 

Across the UK a range of cross-sector forums exist to enable continual improvement in
the delivery of adaptations. In Wales this work is done by the Housing Adaptations
Steering Group; in Northern Ireland by the Joint Adaptations Steering Group; across
England the Home Adaptations Consortium champions quality of provision; in Scotland
the Accessible Housing Group, which is a sub-group of the Scottish Government’s Joint
Housing Delivery Planning Group, involves a wide range of stakeholders and has a role
in contributing to policy development, including on adaptations. The Scottish Housing
Network is a membership organisation which runs a forum focusing on adaptations and
mainly involves a number of local authorities and some Registered Social Landlords (the
Scottish Government are invited to attend).

Example: Strategic planning – establishing integrated housing 
support teams

Organisation: The Lightbulb Project

location: Leicestershire 

Services: Housing support locality teams in each district council area. Targeted,
proactive approach, including via GPs and other health/care professionals such as
those in integrated locality teams.
• Early assessment and triage of housing issues at key points of entry.
• Hub-and-spoke model – integrated locality teams delivering minor and major

adaptations, and housing-related support, advice and information. 

Royal College of Occupational Therapists

17

Practice to improve delivery of adaptations

Skills mix: 
• Housing Support Co-ordinators (HSCs) and Technical Officer.
• Occupational therapists remain in Leicestershire County Council employment.

Method/process: 
• Occupational therapists assess and recommend complex major adaptations
and mentor/support HSCs (who are also trusted assessors) to complete less
complex work. 

• Housing specialists in a separate Hospital Enablement team identify

housing-related barriers to discharge. 

Impact and outcomes: 
• Delivery costs, including Hospital Housing team approximately £1 million per

annum against a potential £2 million per annum saving to health and social care
reduced admissions/delays in transfers of care. 

• Projected savings on DFG delivery costs through more efficient processes and

staffing efficiencies.

Further information: 

https://www.housinglin.org.uk/Topics/type/The-Lightbulb-Project-Switched-on-to-integ
ration-in-Leicestershire

Example: Integrated service delivery

Organisation: Care & Repair Rapid Response Adaptations Service (RRAP)

location: All Wales via 13 Care & Repair Agencies, Care & Repair Cymru and 
partners in statutory services – Health, Social Care and Housing.

Services:
• Very quick, responsive, small adaptations costing up to £350. 
• Non-means-tested and available to all homeowners and private tenants 

aged 60+.

Skills mix:
• Care & Repair case workers, technical officers and handypersons.
• Hospital-based Care & Repair case workers.

Method/process: 
• Referrals accepted from social care, housing, primary and secondary care health

professionals, as well as direct requests from clients and their carers. 

18

Adaptations without delay

Practice to improve delivery of adaptations

• Referrals can be community- or hospital-based, delivering quick solutions that

prevent falls, reduce hospital admissions, assist independent living, or speed up
safe transfers of care and patient flow within hospitals.

Impact and outcomes: 
• Around 18,000 rapid response adaptations completed annually. 
• Delivery times range from same day/immediate to eight days.
• Early engagement between hospital staff, patients and Care & Repair and

consideration of housing needs at hospital discharge planning, combined with
immediate practical solutions through RRAP programme improves patient flow
at hospitals, and saves bed days.

• Care & Repair partnerships with occupational therapists, social care, health and

housing provides quicker small adaptations in communities, outside DFG
processes.

• Estimated that every £1 spent on RRAP saves £7.50 for the public purse.

How to use the framework to establish a workforce 
with the appropriate skills mix

Key message for establishing a workforce with the appropriate 
skills mix

The framework places older and disabled people at the centre of a process that
ensures they receive the right level of assessment from a workforce that has the
right level of skill and knowledge to assess and recommend adaptations. 

Developing mechanisms for allocating cases: Delays are reduced when cases are
allocated to the worker/practitioner who has the appropriate skills to manage the 
case to achieve the best person-centred outcome. For example, if a person’s 
presenting situation is relatively straightforward, an occupational therapist does not
need to be allocated a case where the anticipated adaptation is a standard structural
solution, such as a bathroom adaptation or stairlift. The workforce skills column in the
intervention tables (Tables 2–4, Section 3) can be used to support the development of
mechanisms for allocating cases based on the skills and knowledge required to manage
the case effectively. 

Developing robust policies and procedures: Robust policies and procedures ensure
workers/practitioners work within their scope of practice and are used appropriately 
to assess and deliver adaptations. This approach is particularly important when an
occupational therapist is not involved in the assessment and recommendation of
adaptations. The operational considerations column in the intervention tables (Tables
2–4, Section 3) indicates the policies and procedures that need to be developed and
implemented at each level of intervention. 

Royal College of Occupational Therapists

19

Practice to improve delivery of adaptations

Example: Establishing agreed levels of responsibilities for making
recommendations

Organisation: Royal Borough of Greenwich Occupational Therapy Service

Services: Occupational Therapy Service

Method/process: Guidance on scope of responsibility for Occupational Therapy
Assistant Assessment Officers (OTA AO).
• Outlines criteria for when cases need to be referred back to an occupational

therapist if they appear to become more complex.

• With regard to the RCOT code of ethics and professional conduct in relation to

delegation.

• In line with agreed levels of professional competence outlined in the RCOT

Career Development Framework.

• OTA AOs can assess and recommend simple level-access showers, stairlifts, half

steps, hand rails, ramps, door widening, lever taps, window winders.

Factors where occupational therapy input and authorisation are required include:
• Safeguarding.
• Moving and handling.
• Clients with progressive, neurological and complex conditions.
• All children’s cases.
• Complex social situations.
• Specialist and bespoke equipment needs.

Impact and outcomes:
• Reduces demand on occupational therapy assessments for major adaptations.
• Support for unregulated staff to assess and recommend adaptations when the

situation is simple and to know when they need to seek specialist advice.

Developing and maintaining workforce skills and competencies: The workforce
skills column in the intervention tables (Tables 2–4, Section 3) should be used to audit
current staff for the appropriate level of skills and knowledge to assess and recommend
adaptations for each level of intervention. If gaps in knowledge and skills are identified
appropriate training can be provided. Where a service intends to extend the range of
adaptations provided without an occupational therapy assessment then the workforce
skills column will identify the skills and knowledge a worker will require to work safely
and appropriately. 

20

Adaptations without delay

Practice to improve delivery of adaptations

Example: Workforce training

Organisation: Housing Solutions Change Programme (Scotland) (developed by ihub
Healthcare Improvement Scotland) 

Services: Training a range of sector staff who may come into contact with people in
their own homes, for example nurses, housing officers, podiatrists, occupational
therapists and voluntary sector agencies.

Skills mix: Involves health, housing, social care and third-sector staff within local
Health and Social Care Partnership areas across Scotland

Method/process: Training modules delivered by local training pairs (occupational
therapist and a housing colleague) with an emphasis on early intervention, simple
solutions, exploration of rehousing opportunities and personal outcomes.
Partnership and an integrated approach are advocated to deliver better outcomes.

Module 1 promotes the value of ‘early housing conversations’ for any professionals
visiting people at home to make use of opportunities for preventative interventions.

Module 2 provides a range of housing, health and social care staff with the skills to
assess and commission straightforward adaptations where appropriate.

Module 3 trains non-social care occupational therapists to assess for and commission
major adaptations.

Impact and outcomes: 
• A wider range of staff are able to intervene earlier and enable forward planning.
• Enables a better use of skilled occupational therapists.

Developing interprofessional collaboration and practice for complex cases: 
Delays occur when there is ineffective collaboration between occupational therapy 
and housing teams. Where occupational therapy and housing teams are not integrated,
the framework and categories of adaptations can be used to support and encourage
collaborative working practices. This approach is particularly important for complex
cases where interprofessional collaboration and communication is essential during 
the assessment and design of the adaptations. Where integration of teams is being
considered, the framework and tables are a starting point to consider the skills mix 
and operational issues that need to be addressed to provide a range of solutions to 
a population with diverse needs.

Getting the message across: effective communication

Effective communication between the staff carrying out assessments and the technical
staff responsible for design and installation of adaptations is essential to ensure that
completed adaptations are fit for purpose. It is important to provide staff with
communication tools to make it as easy as possible to complete requests, make
recommendations and explain the reasoning for key requirements.

Royal College of Occupational Therapists

21

Practice to improve delivery of adaptations

In many areas around the UK standardised templates, which can be edited easily, are
being used for simple straightforward adaptations. This ensures that good standards in
relation to minimum space requirements, dimensions and key facilities are always
included while being easily understood by technical staff. 

Example: Adaptations Design Communication ToolKit

Organisation: Northern Ireland Housing Executive

Services:
• A published toolkit (including a list of adaptations that can be installed without

an occupational therapy assessment).

• Evidence-based designs standards that can be used to help older and disabled

people visualise the proposed adaptation.

• Standardised digital forms for applying for adaptations.
• Standardised digital formats for specifying adaptations.

Method/process:
• Published toolkit used to show older and disabled people designs of

standardised adaptations.

• Electronic forms used to send information between occupational therapists and

housing team.

Impact and outcomes: 
• Improved older and disabled people’s understanding of what adaptations will

be installed.

• Improved interagency working and communication.
• Where standard solution can be installed, this has reduced need for joint visits.

Further information:

https://m.nihe.gov.uk/adaptations_design_communications_toolkit.pdf

22

Adaptations without delay

Practice to improve delivery of adaptations

How to use the framework if you are a builder, retailer or
product manufacturer

Key message for builders, retailers and product manufacturers 

Builders, retailers and product manufacturers are increasingly playing an
important role in assessing, recommending and installing adaptations for people
who are paying for their own adaptations. For the public to have confidence in this
sector, it is important that builders, retailers and product manufacturers
demonstrate they are implementing safe and person-centred practices.

knowing when to consult with an occupational therapist: When assessing,
recommending or installing adaptations it is important that builders, retailers and
product manufacturers have the appropriate knowledge and skills to deliver this type 
of service to older and disabled people. The overall framework and intervention tables
(Tables 2–4, Section 3) will help this sector to understand what level of intervention they
can deliver safely and effectively, and when they need to draw on the expertise of
occupational therapists.

Example: Supporting decisions on when to refer for occupational
therapist assessment

A checklist used in Trusted Assessor Training

Method/process: An example of this is given in the Disabled Living Foundation
training questionnaire:

How do I know when to refer on to an occupational therapist?

It can be difficult, especially when you first start working in the role of a Trusted
Assessor, to know when you are able to provide a safe solution and when you are
not. A simple way of deciding this is to ask the following questions:
• Does the customer have more than two conditions that are impacting on their

ability to complete the chosen task?

• Does the customer’s condition change significantly from day to day or is their

condition likely to change significantly within the next year?

• Does the customer lack capacity to make decisions and/or are they unable to

follow instructions?

• Is the environment complex and difficult to adapt?
• Is the solution outside standard and simple options available to you?
• Has the person lost the ability to transfer from one seat to another?
• Does a Trusted Assessor solution impact others’ health, development or

independence within the environment?

Royal College of Occupational Therapists

23

Practice to improve delivery of adaptations

• Are there other areas that the customer is struggling with in the same
environment that a Trusted Assessor solution wouldn’t solve safely?

If the answer is yes to any of these questions then you should seek help from an
occupational therapist.

Further information:

https://www.dlf.org.uk

Collaborative opportunities with independent occupational therapists: There are 
a growing number of older and disabled people who require a targeted or specialist 
level of intervention/service but who are self-funding. There is an opportunity for
independent occupational therapists and building professionals to collaborate to meet
this demand. The overall framework, intervention tables and categories of adaptations
(Tables 2–4, Section 3) can provide a foundation and structure to develop business
partnerships between independent occupational therapists and builders interested in
providing a service to this population of older and disabled people. 

Product suppliers and manufacturers’ role in the delivery of specialist
interventions: Sourcing, researching and analysing the cost–benefits of products
comprise an important part of assessing and recommending adaptations. This process
can be lengthy if workers/practitioners do not have easy access to product information.
Product manufacturers and suppliers can play an important role in reducing delays in
the adaptations process by making the following information available:
• How the product can be used to improve functional performance.
• What issues the product can/cannot address.
• Cost–benefit analysis of a product.
• Case study examples of how the product has been used in the real world.

How to use the framework if you are a member of 
the public

Key message to members of the public who want to use the
framework to understand the level of intervention or type of service
they need to adapt their home

The framework and supporting tables help you to understand the type of advice or
support you or your family member need to adapt the home. Understanding this
information will help you to make informed decisions about which services can
provide the best solutions for your situation. 

Identifying the type of intervention/service you or a family member need to
adapt the home: Delays are avoided when people know the type of adaptation or
service that will provide them or their family member with the best outcome to address

24

Adaptations without delay

Practice to improve delivery of adaptations

the issues they are having in and around the home. The nature of complexity columns
in the intervention tables (Tables 2–4, Section 3) can be used by people to understand
the type of service and category of adaptation they are likely to require for each level 
of intervention. As discussed under signposting at first point of contact (above),
communicating this information helps direct people to the service that best addresses
their needs. 

Example: Guided advice and support on daily living for older and
disabled people and children

AskSARA is an online interactive self-help tool that guides users through a number
of simple questions about their abilities and environment, and provides impartial
advice and information on products and equipment to suit their needs.

Further information:

https://asksara.dlf.org.uk

Self-funding and checking the quality of a service: If you are self-funding an
adaptation, it is important to know that the builder or company has the right skills to be
able to recommend and install the adaptation. It is also important to know whether you
will benefit from the input of an occupational therapist, who can assess the person and
the home environment and then identify and recommend solutions. The workforce skills
column for each level of intervention can be used as a checklist to ensure a builder has
the right skills and knowledge to recommend and install the adaptation; in addition it
will indicate whether you will require input from an occupational therapist. 

Example: One-stop shop enabling self-referral across tenure

Organisation: Borders Care and Repair commissioned by Eildon Housing in
partnership with Scottish Borders Council Housing Strategy

Services: 
• Help and advice on housing repairs, improvements and adaptations.
• Scope: older people and people with disabilities living in the Scottish Borders,

who are owner occupiers or living in privately or socially rented
accommodation.

Method/process:
• One-stop shop for adaptations.
• Options appraisal templates to support decisions.
• Occupational therapy input on complex and high-cost cases.

Impact and outcomes: 
• A consistent and equitable adaptation service to all people in the Borders

regardless of tenure.

Royal College of Occupational Therapists

25

Practice to improve delivery of adaptations

• Enabling people to self-refer for assessment and adaptations.
• Reduced waiting times.

Further information:

https://www.scotborders.gov.uk/info/20070/care_at_home/520/care_and_repair_
service

26

Adaptations without delay

Annexe 1
Sources of design guidance

This section provides links to a range of useful sources of guidance, tools and relevant
resources that can be used when considering the design of inclusive and accessible
home adaptations. It includes links to guidance about factors to consider in 
designing for:
• Adaptations.
• Inclusive and accessible housing.
• Cognitive impairments.
• Visual impairments.

It is important when making recommendations for adaptations that practitioners are
aware of their respective responsibilities in relation to The Construction (Design and
Management) Regulations 2015 (CDM 2015).10 Services are advised to consult these 
when developing any operational guidance for their staff.

Adaptations

The aim of home adaptations is to make it easier and safer for people to access and 
use their own homes. There will be specific factors to consider for each individual, their
priorities and needs, and aspects particular to their home environment. The following
evidence-based guidance on space requirements and layouts provides useful baselines
from which to develop bespoke adaptations. 

Northern Ireland Housing Executive

Adaptations design communications toolkit is published by Northern Ireland Housing
Executive and developed through close work and interagency working with disabled
people, occupational therapists, housing designers and the Northern Ireland Federation
of Housing Associations.

This toolkit provides detailed recommendations on space requirements and positioning
to support the design of bespoke home adaptations. A useful tool to appraise room
layouts, it provides evidence-based, consistent and equitable housing adaptation design
standards for all housing tenures:
• Design formats that help visualise proposed housing adaptations and depict how

people with mobility difficulties and carers use the space are included. 

10 Health and Safety Executive (2015) Managing health and safety in construction: Construction (Design and

Management) Regulations 2015. [London]: Stationery Office. Available at:
http://www.hse.gov.uk/pUbns/priced/l153.pdf Accessed on 12.03.19.

Royal College of Occupational Therapists

27

Sources of design guidance

• Standardised and robust occupational therapy formats for housing adaptations

recommendations, financial governance, specifications and follow-up
communications to all housing providers.

https://www.housinglin.org.uk/_assets/Resources/Housing/OtherOrganisation/adaptations_
design_communications_toolkit.pdf

Muscular Dystrophy UK

Adaptations manual: for children and adults with muscle wasting conditions, revised for
Muscular Dystrophy UK by occupational therapists who work closely with families living
with muscle-wasting conditions, includes examples and practical information about
what is available to families, as well as an outline of the process of making adaptations
to their homes. 

https://www.musculardystrophyuk.org/about-muscle-wasting-conditions/information-
factsheets/equipment-and-adaptations/adaptations-manual/

Disabled Living Foundation 

The Disabled Living Foundation produces a number of factsheets for the public, written
and peer-reviewed by experienced occupational therapists, on factors to consider when
selecting daily living equipment and adaptations. These include:
• Choosing and fitting grab rails.
• Choosing equipment for getting up and down stairs.

https://www.dlf.org.uk/content/factsheets-groups

Foundations

The national body for home improvement agencies in England provides useful guidance
on the factors to consider when designing different types of home adaptations
including:
• Ramp design.
• Shower adaptations.
• Kitchen adaptations. 

https://www.foundations.uk.com

Care and Repair England

This national charitable organisation, set up to improve the homes and living conditions
of older people, offers a range of useful resources on repairs and adaptations.

http://careandrepair-england.org.uk

28

Adaptations without delay

Sources of design guidance

Care and Repair Cymru

The national body for care and repair in Wales, whose vision is a Wales where all older
people can live independently in warm, safe and accessible homes.

https://www.careandrepair.org.uk

Care and Repair Scotland 

This body offers independent advice and assistance to help older and disabled
homeowners repair, improve or adapt their homes.

http://www.careandrepairscotland.co.uk

Design Council

The Design Council’s purpose is to make life better by design. They are an independent
charity whose vision is a world where the role and value of design is recognised as a
fundamental value, enabling happier, healthier and safer lives for all. Their current 
Spark programme is focused on home innovation and looking to turn bright ideas into
products that transform the experience of getting around, remembering things and
doing daily tasks to enable more independent living.

https://www.designcouncil.org.uk/what-we-do/accelerator/design-council-spark

Dunhill Medical Trust

The Dunhill Medical Trust not only funds the very best of the UK’s academic and clinical
research into understanding the mechanisms of ageing and treating age-related
diseases and frailty, they also support community-based organisations that are working
to enhance the lives of those who need extra support in later life. They have recently
announced a new research programme that will address the evidence gap on
adaptations and assistive technology to enable safer, independent living with dignity.

https://dunhillmedical.org.uk/2018/09/03/expert-in-the-future-of-housing-for-an-ageing-
population-take-a-look-at-our-latest-call-for-proposals/

Inclusive and accessible housing 

There are a number of resources available to support the design, build and retrofitting
of inclusive and accessible housing. The core intention is to create homes that are
flexible and adaptable to meet a range of needs.

Housing Learning and Improvement Network 

The Housing Learning and Improvement Network (Housing LIN) brings together housing,
health and social care professionals in England, Wales and Scotland to exemplify
innovative housing solutions for an ageing population. 

Occupational therapists: helping to get the housing design right is a collection of links to
resources to support inclusive and accessible housing design.

https://www.housinglin.org.uk/Topics/browse/Design-building/occupational-therapy

Royal College of Occupational Therapists

29

Sources of design guidance

An occupational therapist’s access checklist: a practical tool is a quick reference checklist 
to existing regulations and best practice guidance on inclusive and accessible housing
design, covering minimum requirements to more generous provision. Key aspects of 
the home are included, from access and approach to internal layouts.

https://www.housinglin.org.uk/Topics/type/An-Occupational-Therapists-Access-Checklist-a-
practical-Tool

Royal Institute of British Architects

The Royal Institute of British Architects is a global professional membership body driving
excellence in architecture. It supports its members to deliver better buildings and places,
stronger communities and a sustainable environment. 

The third edition of the Wheelchair housing design guide (2018) provides advice and
design considerations to support the delivery of good-quality wheelchair-accessible
housing. It details how to meet and exceed the minimum requirements laid out in 
The building regulations: approved document M: volume 1: dwellings: category 3: wheelchair
accessible (ADM4(3)).11 It was produced by contributors from the Royal Institute of 
British Architects, Centre for Accessible Environments and the Royal College of
Occupational Therapists Specialist Section – Housing, along with input from a
cross-section of experts including building control, architects, developers and other
housing professionals. It includes:
• Clear cross-references to ADM4(3).
• Technical diagrams illustrating design details.
• Simple-to-follow guidance on best practice and technical provisions.

https://www.habinteg.org.uk/whdg3

Age-friendly housing: future design for older people (Park and Porteus 2018) sets out how
we should approach the design of future housing for an ageing population. It looks at
how well-designed, accessible and adaptable buildings can facilitate the provision of
care, support, independence and wellbeing, and also includes a section on adaptation
and refurbishment.

https://www.ribabookshops.com/item/age-friendly-housing-future-design-for-older-people/
91915

11 Great Britain. HM Government (2015) The building regulations: approved document M: access to and use of

buildings: volume 1: dwellings. [Newcastle Upon Tyne]: NBS. Available at:
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/540330/BR
_PDF_AD_M1_2015_with_2016_amendments_V3.pdf Accessed on 13.03.19.

30

Adaptations without delay

Sources of design guidance

Royal College of Occupational Therapists Specialist Section – 
Housing (RCOTSS-H)

RCOTSS-H provides a forum for occupational therapists with an interest in housing,
inclusive design and accessible home environments. It works closely with other
organisations and professionals to advocate for improved standards of housing for
older and disabled people. 

https://www.rcot.co.uk/about-us/specialist-sections/housing-rcot-ss

Centre for Ageing Better

The Centre for Ageing Better is a charity, funded by an endowment from the National
Lottery Community Fund, working to create a society where everyone enjoys a good
later life. Their Safe and Accessible Homes programme of work seeks to ensure new
homes are future-proofed and that there is a diversity of suitable homes, that current
homes are adapted, and better information is available for people approaching later life.

https://www.ageing-better.org.uk/our-work/safe-accessible-homes

Centre for Accessible Environments

The Centre for Accessible Environments is a leading authority on inclusive design. 
It provides consultancy, training and research. It also has a selection of free publications
and others for sale on building design and management to meet all user needs,
including disabled and older people. 

https://cae.org.uk/

Cognitive impairments 

The design of the environment can have a significant impact on the abilities of people 
with cognitive and neuro-diverse impairments to make sense of their surroundings and
support independence. This may include people living with dementia, learning disability 
or autistic spectrum disorders. The following provide some guidance on the factors to
consider.

Beyond Accessibility

Beyond Accessibility is a team of therapists that specialises in how people live in the
home environment.

99 ideas to make homes easier, safer, and more enjoyable for families with children on the
autism spectrum by Paige Hays (2017) provides ideas and recommendations specific to
designing home areas for families with members who have ASD.

http://beyondaccessibility.com/homes-autism-spectrum-disorder

Royal College of Occupational Therapists

31

Sources of design guidance

The Challenging Behaviour Foundation 

The Challenging Behaviour Foundation (CBF) is a charity for people with severe learning
disabilities who display behaviour described as challenging. CBF provides information
and resources to enable families to work with others to plan proactively for personalised
housing for their relative.

https://www.challengingbehaviour.org.uk

Helen Hamlyn 

The Helen Hamlyn Centre for Design at the Royal College of Art undertakes design
research and projects with industry that will contribute to improving people’s lives.

Living in the community: housing design for adults with autism (Brand 2010) details the
findings from a research partnership between the Kingswood Trust and Helen Hamlyn,
with a particular focus on housing providers, architects and designers involved in the
design, refurbishment and development of residential accommodation for adults with
autism.

https://www.rca.ac.uk/documents/390/Living_in_the_Community.pdf

Centre for Excellence in Universal Design: National Disability Authority

The Centre for Excellence in Universal Design is dedicated to enabling the design 
of environments that can be accessed, understood and used regardless of age, size 
and ability.

Universal Design guidelines: dementia friendly dwellings for people with dementia, their
families and carers was published in 2015 by the National Disability Authority in
Northern Ireland to inform those who commission, design, build, provide and occupy
dwellings. The Universal Design dementia-friendly approach aims to help people to
remain living at home and in their community independently and safely for as long 
as possible. 

http://universaldesign.ie

Dementia Services Development Centre (DSDC), University of Stirling

The DSDC is an international centre of knowledge and expertise dedicated to improving
the lives of people with dementia. It draws on research and practice from across the
world to provide a comprehensive, up-to-date resource on all aspects of dementia.

https://dementia.stir.ac.uk/about-dsdc

Visual impairment

Attention to levels and location of lighting and tonal contrast can have a significant
impact on the ability of people with sight loss to find their way around, and help to make
it easier and safer to carry out everyday activities.

32

Adaptations without delay

Sources of design guidance

Housing Learning and Improvement Network 

A comprehensive range of information on design and lighting for people with sight loss
is available on dedicated pages.

https://www.housinglin.org.uk/Topics/browse/sight-loss-home-the-built-environment/

Thomas Pocklington Trust 

Thomas Pocklington Trust is a national charity dedicated to delivering positive change
for people with sight loss. The Trust funds research to support independent living and
identify barriers and opportunities in areas such as employment, housing and
technology. 

Making an entrance: colour, contrast and design of entrances to homes of people with sight
loss (2013)

http://pocklington-trust.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/Check-List.pdf

Lighting in and around the home: a guide to better lighting for people with sight loss (2018)

http://www.pocklington-trust.org.uk/project/lighting-around-home-guide-better-lighting-
people-sight-loss

Good practice in the design of homes and living spaces for people with dementia and sight
loss (Greasley-Adams et al. 2011; jointly produced by Thomas Pocklington Trust and
DSDC)

http://dementia.stir.ac.uk/design/good-practice-design-dementia-and-sight-loss

Royal National Institute of Blind People

RNIB is one of the UK’s leading sight loss charities and the largest community of blind
and partially sighted people. They have a dedicated webpage that provides useful
information for people who are losing their sight or have a sight problem. It explains
the types of improvements, repairs or adaptations that may be needed to help people
with sight loss live independently. 

https://www.rnib.org.uk/information-everyday-living-home-and-leisure/adapting-your-home

Royal College of Occupational Therapists

33

Annexe 2
Review method and findings

The Royal College of Occupational Therapists (RCOT) commissioned a team from the
Housing Learning and Improvement Network (Housing LIN), which included
occupational therapists, to: 
• Determine whether there was still a need for Minor adaptations without delay

publication, Part 1.

• Determine whether there was still a need for Minor adaptations without delay

publication, Part 2 (Technical Specifications).

• Ensure that a revised version of Minor adaptations without delay was produced that
would be valued by key stakeholders in all four UK nations and representative of
occupational therapy practice.

• Raise the profile of the assessment process of occupational therapists in preventative

adaptations and demonstrate when their expertise is required.

The original version of Minor adaptations without delay (MAWD), which was published 
in 2006, was jointly commissioned by the College of Occupational Therapists and the
former Housing Corporation. The guidance was in two parts:
• Part 1: A practical guide for housing associations, which included a list of minor

adaptations that do not require an occupational therapy assessment and outlined 
the criteria for good practice in the delivery. 

• Part 2: Technical Specifications, which provided guidance on the installation of a

selection of minor adaptations.

The primary aim of MAWD was to enable more timely delivery of minor adaptations 
for tenants of housing associations.

The review of MAWD, undertaken during 2018, involved:
• A desktop review of current policy, legislation, guidance and key research of relevance

to the delivery and benefits of home adaptations across the four UK nations.

• Primary research, which involved:

• Interviews with 31 professional stakeholders (January to April 2018).
• An online survey aimed at front-line practitioners that generated over 800

responses.

• Discussion groups with stakeholders in all four UK nations (May/June 2018).

34

Adaptations without delay

Review method and findings

Interviews were conducted with:
• Occupational therapy managers.
• Occupational therapy policy leads in the four UK nations.
• Housing associations.
• National bodies for home improvement agencies.
• Care and repair organisations.
• Royal College of Occupational Therapists Specialist Section – Housing leads in the four

UK nations.

Focus group meetings were subsequently held in all four UK nations, which included
groups in Scotland, Northern Ireland and Wales, a practitioner consultation meeting in
Manchester, and a presentation at the Home Adaptations Consortium, England. The
consultation also included a joint meeting as part of the Disabled Facilities Grant Review
in England. 

The purpose of this primary research was to:
• Assess the extent to which the original MAWD publication achieved its aims.
• Across the four nations, identify the common issues affecting the process of providing

(minor) adaptations.

• Elicit the gaps stakeholders identified in the original publication.
• Identify the content and resources required in a new Adaptations without delay guide. 

Findings in relation to the extent to which MAWD has achieved its aims included:
• For the housing associations MAWD was targeted at, it has been and continues to be

a valuable resource (but some housing associations are unaware of MAWD).
• Occupational therapy managers have used it as a negotiation tool with housing

associations in relation to their role and remit.

• MAWD has been used to develop Adaptations Agreements between local authorities

and housing associations.

• MAWD is mentioned in a number of reports and guidance documents outside of

England.

However, the review of MAWD also found that:
• In practice some housing associations are still referring to occupational therapy

teams.

• Occupational therapists want to work in creative ways (beyond working with housing
associations), but MAWD does not provide reassurance or guidance on how to do this.

• The process of providing (minor) adaptations without an occupational therapy

assessment has not generally been broadened to apply across tenure.

Royal College of Occupational Therapists

35

Review method and findings

Findings in relation to the common issues across the four UK nations about the process
of providing adaptations included:
• There continue to be delays in the delivery of minor adaptations for people in private

tenures.

• There continue to be delays in the delivery of major adaptations across tenure.
• Some housing associations are not providing minor adaptations without an

occupational therapy assessment.

• Across the four UK nations, adaptations are defined by type (minor/major) and 

cost rather than being defined by the complexity of the individual’s circumstances 
(i.e. related to their needs and home environment).

• There are varying levels of skills and competence among individuals signposting at

first points of contact in housing, health, social care and the private sector.

• There continues to be a lack of information for individuals about adaptations: how 
to decide what they might need, when to consult an occupational therapist, what
funding is available and who can carry out the work.

Findings in relation to the gaps stakeholders identified in the original publication
included:
• MAWD does not provide sufficient guidance on the criteria for when and why an

occupational therapist is or is not needed. 

• The existing guidance is primarily focused on housing associations and their tenants. 
• The existing guidance is paper-based; an online version is now required. 
• The existing guidance is less applicable to Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales than

to England.

Findings in relation to the content and resources required in a new Adaptations without
delay guide included:
• A framework for decision making that is based on the complexity of the ‘case’ in

relation to adaptations.

• A reasoning framework for when an occupational therapist is not needed. 
• In both cases (above), guidance about when an occupational therapy assessment is

not required for recommending different types of adaptations.

• A definition of minor and major adaptations that is not based on cost.
• Updated examples of good practice in the delivery of adaptations.
• Recommended training/competencies, particularly for non-occupational therapists

who may be able to recommend adaptations.

• A guide that is applicable across all four UK nations.

The discussion groups specifically identified the disproportionate use of specialist 
(i.e. occupational therapist) skills in relation to the assessment for and provision of
adaptations as an issue that this new guide should address. 

36

Adaptations without delay

Review method and findings

This review identified an ongoing need for practical guidance in relation to the
assessment for and provision of adaptations more generally, beyond existing
categorisations of ‘minor’ and ‘major’ adaptations, across all tenures. The review
identified a need for this guide to provide a framework for decision making about
adaptations based on the level and degree of complexity rather than more traditional
minor/major adaptation and cost-based definitions. 

Royal College of Occupational Therapists

37

About the authors

Rachel Russell PHd, MSc, BSc (Hons) Occupational Therapy

Rachel is an occupational therapist, lecturer and researcher based at the University of
Salford. With 18 years’ experience of working in adult health and social care, she has
been directly involved in the assessment and delivery of home adaptations in several
local authorities. Since 2011, her research has focused on the home adaptations 
process in the UK, particularly the role of occupational therapists in this process.

Marney Walker DipCOT, BA, MA

Marney Walker is an independent occupational therapist with 25 years’ experience in
housing and social care. She specialises in advising on the design of inclusive and
accessible housing and adaptations. She has an MA in Design Research for Disability 
and has taught at master’s level.  She hosts a web page of resources on the Housing LIN
Design Hub, is an Inclusive Design Assessor for the Civic Trust and a member of the
Access Association.

Ian Copeman BSc, MSc

Ian leads the Housing LIN’s programme of research and commercial consultancy. 
He has previously worked as a local authority commissioner of housing and care
services, for housing associations and for voluntary sector organisations that support
people with disabilities. 

He has an extensive track record of undertaking research projects in housing and 
care in relation to older and disabled people. His recent projects with a high public
profile include working in a consortium with Ipsos MORI on the Department of Work 
and Pensions and the Department of Communities and Local Government Supported
Accommodation Review across England, Scotland and Wales. He is the author of the
National Housing Federation’s Home from hospital report and the Local Government
Association’s Housing our ageing population report. 

He has previously been a trustee of a charity that provides housing advice and support
for people with learning disabilities and their families. 

38

Adaptations without delay

About the authors

Jeremy Porteus FRSA, Chief Executive, Housing LIN 

Jeremy was formerly National Lead for Housing at the Department of Health 
responsible for the Extra Care Housing capital programme. After leaving the
department, he founded the independent Housing LIN (Learning and Improvement
Network), bringing together over 25,000 housing, health and social care practitioners 
in England, Wales and Scotland to identify and showcase innovative housing solutions
for an ageing population. 

The Housing LIN’s free knowledge- and information-sharing activities, along with its
consultancy business, provide market insight and intelligence on the latest funding,
research, policy and practice to inspire better housing and care choices. 

Jeremy is Inquiry Secretariat and author of the influential HAPP12, HAPPI3 and HAPPI4
reports for the All Party Parliamentary Group on Housing and Care for Older People. 
He also co-authored RIBA’s 2018 publication: Age-friendly housing: Future design for 
older people.

https://www.housinglin.org.uk

Royal College of Occupational Therapists

39

Steering group members

Sue Adams OBE
Chief Executive, Care & Repair England

Paul Cooper
Professor Advisor – Practice, Royal College of Occupational Therapists

Ian Copeman
Principal Associate, Housing LIN

Jenny Davies
Occupational Therapist, Independent Practitioner

Welsh Representative, RCOTSS – Housing

Sarah Davies
Senior Policy and Practice Office, Chartered Institute of Housing

Joanna Gillies
Occupational Therapist

Scotland Representative, RCOTSS – Housing

Eve Parkinson 
Head of Adult Services, Monmouthshire County Council 

RCOT Welsh Board member

Jill Pritchard
Change Management Practitioner 

Scotland Representative, RCOTSS – Housing

Dr Rachel Russell
Occupational Therapist, University of Salford 

Julia Skelton
Director of Professional Operations, Royal College of Occupational Therapists

Paul Smith
Director, Foundations

Mary Stobie 
Occupational Therapist 

Northern Ireland Representative, RCOTSS – Housing 

Marney Walker
Independent Occupational Therapist

Philippa Winstanley 
Service Manager – Promoting Independent Living Services, Herefordshire Council 

England Representative, RCOTSS – Housing. 

40

Adaptations without delay

Adaptations without delay
A guide to planning and delivering
home adaptations differently

Adaptations play a crucial role in prevention and need 

to be delivered in a timely manner. This publication, 

commissioned by RCOT from the Housing LIN, 

demonstrates how adaptations can be delivered in all four 

UK nations with the individual at the centre. The document 

highlights how occupational therapists add value to the 

process, as well as the rationale for when they are needed 

due to complexity of individual circumstances. Consulted 

on widely with a range of stakeholders including home 

improvement agencies and housing associations; this 

important guidance will assist social care and housing 

managers as to how adaptations can best be provided 

locally.

Available
for Download

Available
for Download

Available
for Download

Available
for Download

rcot.co.uk
Tel: 020 7357 6480

Download for 
RCOT members

© 2019 Royal College of Occupational Therapists. A registered charity in 
England and Wales (No. 275119) and in Scotland (No. SCO39573) and a 
company registered in England (No. 1347374)

Download for 
BAOT members

Download for 

RCOT members

